#fourthlevel
[[A Victorian Ecological Disaster= Imperialism, the Telegraph, and Gutta-Percha]]


“together. It could take over six months by ship for messages to reach the imperial capital from the colonies. The problem was solved by the invention of the electric telegraph, which could put the least significant British, Belgian, German, or French colonial outpost into almost instantaneous contact with Whitehall, the rue de Brederode, the Reichskolonialamt, or the Quai d'Orsay. The creation of the telegraph n”          (Tully, 2009, p. 560) with increased speed of communication/orders comes a decreased need for autonomy/free thinking, with the communications becoming closer and closer to instant it effectivly tethers the outposts to the motherland

“work - later superseded by the wireless - was a huge industrial undertaking and involved the manufacture and installation of hundreds of thousands of miles of cable, much of it laid across the deep ocean beds. The key to the success of the new system was a natural plastic, gutta-percha (almost forgotten today), which proved indispensable as insulation for the submarine cables. However, as this article will show, the "gum" was obtained by profligate, inefficient, and ultimately unsustainable methods of extraction, which killed the trees in the process. The imperial authorities and the telegraph companies gave little thought to the future of a precious finite resource: it was merely one more tropical commodity to be ruthlessly exploited. So great was the demand for the gum that the wild trees that provided it were almost extinct by the late nineteenth century, causing a flutter of panic in an industry that had taken it for granted. This ecological disaster adumbrated the galloping destruction of tropical rainforests so depressingly familiar to us to”        (Tully, 2009, p. 560) due to the nature of the location the cables/repeaters/relays/towers are placed in (ocean, roofs, undisclosed data centers) we often forget how much industrial infastruce the internet actually takes up

“For most of human history, the speed of communication was largely restricted to the pace of physical transportation. This had important social, political, and economic implications, for although imperial armies were able to conquer surprisingly vast areas of land relatively quickly, maintaining the unity of empires against centrifugal forces was a constant battle: the barbarians lurked constantly, if not at the gates, then at the outskirts of the realm. Communications were necessarily slow. Should an enemy threaten to breach the outer defenses or a subjugated people rise in revolt, the news might take weeks, months, or even years to percolate back to the imperial capital. Put simply, the "tyranny of distance" was a constant threat to the integrity of empires: an additional "stretch" to the economic problems postulated by Paul Kennedy.3 It was only during the era of "high imperialism" of the nine3 Paul Kennedy's well-known thesis was that wealth was necessary to protect wealth and that there comes a time when more wealth is expended defending an empire than it can itself produce. Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Grea”           (Tully, 2009, p. 560) even without cellular or other airwave transmitters we would still have increased speed of communication with cars vs horses and feet

“13 May 1787 and arrived at Botany Bay on 18 January of the following year. The new colonists who huddled on the alien Australian coast would have learned of the fall of the Bastille nine months after it occurred, at the”             (Tully, 2009, p. 561) massive time delay causes people to live on their own without relative support

“other. The drawback of this system - as with more sophisticated optical telegraphy - was that it could not be used in bad weather or at night. In those circumstances, should the need arise the authorities depended on an altogether more primitive "auditory telegraph" capable of relaying only the most basic”               (Tully, 2009, p. 562) each advancement slight improves on the other, we still have rows of towers that relay our messages today

“wireless, the electric telegraph nevertheless was a quantum leap in human co”             (Tully, 2009, p. 563) from flags only in the day to something that runs on electricity and works despite weather

“Apart from the metal for the wires, the new system depended on reliable insulation from t”           (Tully, 2009, p. 563) still weak to weather because it uses long wires, not fully fixing past problems

“the postindustrial wastelands of Silvertown, "are the gutta-percha works?" Unless he was asking a dentist, a botanist, a geographer, an imperial historian, or a very old person, the chances are that his question would be met with a blank stare. It is difficult to think of another once-ubiquitous industrial and domestic commodity that has been so comprehensively forgotten as this rainforest gum. (As a rough gauge of modern familiarity with gutta-percha, I asked my undergraduate students if any of them had heard of it. Unsurpris”              (Tully, 2009, p. 564) as technology improves the old ones are not even learned or touched by newer gens

“wrote in 1862 that, Almost every species of toy is made from this gum; the furniture, the decorations, and even the covering of our houses are constructed from it; and we make of it soles for our boots and shoes, and linings for our water cisterns. It is used for pipes, alike for the conveyance of water and sound. Ear-trumpets, of various sizes and forms, are made of it; we also now frequently find gutta percha tubes carried from the door of the medical man to his bedside; we also, as often, meet with the Domestic Telegraph - a gutta percha pipe passing from one room to another by which messages can be carried to all parts of the house; and when a pew in church is occupied by a deaf owner, a similar pipe ensures the afflicted worshipper to hear the word of God . . . .n (e”               (Tully, 2009, p. 564) like plastic is used today

“of its extraordinary qualities from a Malay laborer who showed him how it became pliable when immersed in hot water and hardened as it cooled”              (Tully, 2009, p. 566) like those bath toys i had as a kid

“p to fifteen feet off the ground. 27 The unique potential of gutta-percha became apparent in 1847 when the German engineer Werner von Siemens used it as an insulator for an electric telegraph cable running parallel to a railway line and invented a special die to coat the cable in the process,28 although the family of the Danish engineer F. H. Danchel”               (Tully, 2009, p. 567) stretching an overused resouce even farther with specific but very needed uses

“that the British were keen to ensure the development of what was known at the time as an "all red line" to connect the outposts of their far-flung empire without it ever passing over for”           (Tully, 2009, p. 569) garentees that communications remain intact unless they get directly attacked which would be war

“thousands of sensitive eyes and ears. The "nerves" were a triumph of Victorian engineering design. The cable that first linked Valentia in Ireland with Newfoundland 1,852 miles away was composed of seven three-eighths-inch copper wires twisted tightly together, each wire individually coated with three layers of refined gutta-percha and minutely inspected for faults to make the insulation and protection from seawater as perfect as possible. The twisted cables were then sheathed in tarred hemp, itself wound round tightly with iron wire to protect it from sharp rocks and other submarine hazards. The cable was spun in hundred-mile lengths, which when completed were laid in a close zigzag pattern o”         (Tully, 2009, p. 569) fairly similar to not only modern wires but also how modern ocean fiber optic cables are laid

“the sources."48 Extinction was a real possibility in many parts of the peninsula and archipelago. Twenty-two years before Brannt published his comprehensive book on rubber and gutta-percha, the Scottish botanist James Collins reported that the Isonandra”          (Tully, 2009, p. 572) canadian beavers during the trapping days

“and operation of the Internet was running out with little prospect of a substitute being”           (Tully, 2009, p. 574) Microchips used in servers and computers face uncertain times with very limited production locations that often come under threat due to political reasons (Taiwan)

“Tully: A Victorian Ecological Disaster 575 The huge demand had been unsustainable. The first transatlantic telegraph cable, laid in 1857, was 1,852 miles long and weighed 2,000 tons, one-eighth of which, or 250 tons, was gutta-percha.58 By the early 1 890s, according to an expert estimate, the cable industry was consuming four million pounds of gum per year.59 By the early twentieth century, there were some 200,000 nautical miles of submarine cable around the world. A very rough calculation indicates that the gutta-percha in these cables must have totaled around 27,000 tons. On the basis of an average yield of eleven ounces of latex per tree, almost 88 million gutta-percha trees must have been sacrificed to make this possible. The years 1898 and 1899 saw projects that were particularly demanding for gutta-percha, with submarine cables laid between Vancouver and Australia and between the far-flung outposts of the German empire in Africa and Oceania. Although the annual exports of gutta-percha from Singapore averaged between six million and nine million pounds, these two years saw exports of ten million and sixteen million pounds. By a rough calculation, this meant that more than fourteen and a half million trees were chopped down for the 1898 exports, and more than twenty-three and a quarter million in 1898.60 Ev”             (Tully, 2009, p. 575) the nerves that connect and bind all internet bound nations together